Hey welcome back! So, in this video we are
going to look at the structure of our little text
adventure engine. We're going to look at something called an enum
or enumerated type, and I'm going to challenge you, at the end,
to apply your knowledge by completing the story.
And I hope you write your own story, actually. it would be fantastic if
you could use different story text than we
are using. So, what is the structure
of our game engine? I'll just tell you and then I'll show you
and then I'll remind you. So, don't expect to
understand this straight away, but the Update function is going to keep the game
in the right state. We're going to write separate state methods.
Their job will be to set the text and respond to keys,
and we'll have one of those per state i.e., eight
state methods. So, just to put that in context, what
on earth does that mean? Let's dive into our code,
go into TextController.cs, and this is how it
is, at the moment. Let's start thinking about how we want it to be.
Right, so firstly we need
to talk about what this Update
method is going to do, and it's not going to
be setting any text. Instead it's going to keep the game in a particular
state. So, let's make the first of our state
methods first. So void, each one of these is going to be void, it
returns nothing. I'm going to prefix it with state,
and then, I'm going to call the first one cell.
OK, so this is the method that handles what happens in the
cell state. So, this is where we can just take our text,
that we used to have in the Update for testing, and pop it down
there. I'm going to fix the indentation,
so it looks nice, and that's that! Great!
I said the second thing that a
state method was going to do was to handle key presses. Well, look
we have some code here, which we wrote before, so let's use that.
What are the key presses you can make
from the cell? Well, let's take a look!
S for Sheets, for example, and that goes to sheets_0,
so let's make that happen.
If (Input.GetKeyDown
is (KeyCode.S)) then what? Well, then we
set the state. So, now we need to think about what setting
the state means, so this is where we need something called
enum. We need this enumerated type to store our
state. We could just store the state in numbers, it's not very nice though,
because we could easily lose track of our numbers, so why don't we
store them in English.
C# has something called an enum.
The Microsoft docs define it like this: "The enum keyword is
used to declare an enumeration, a disitinct type that consists of a set
of named consatants called the enumerator list."
Let's take a look at their documentation and see how that actually pans out.
Here you go, you've got a great example here with days
of the week, Saturday, Sunday Monday, etc., a
simple list of constants. So, let's copy that code from
Microsoft documentation, or you could just type
what you see when I get that and let's start
making this happen. Now, where in this
script are we going to be making this enum
variable? Well, it's going to need to be an instance
variable, up here at the top at this level of
scope, because we're going to want to set it in several
different places, in several different sub-methods. So,
we define the enum like this. Of course, it's not called Days,
it's called States, and it's not got these members, it's got
other members that include things like cell,
mirror, etc. And we
want to define explicitly whether it's public or private, and
I want it to be private, because we just don't need access to it outside
of this method. So, just go ahead now and
fill in the rest of your states, from the Game
Design Doc. Cell, Mirror, and then what else do we
have? We have sheets_0 and lock_0.
And then, on the other side of the
chasm, we have cell_0, sheets_1, lock_1.
And finally, freedom}; OK fantastic!
So, therefore we have setup the enum there, but we haven't
yet actually made a variable, somewhere we can actually
store the current state. So, how are we going to do
that? Well, it's going to be private,
and it's going to be
of type States. Remember, we go
the type and then the name of our variable, and then,
it's myState. Alright, so we've made a variable called
state that can store any one of these states. So, let's test that, let's
see how it works. We don't need "Hello world!" in the Start
anymore, but what would be nice, in the Start, is to set the state wouldn't it.
And what is my state, at the Start? Well,
myState = States.
to access the list and then you've got a dropdown list. Wonderful!
States.cell; Great!
Now, we said the Update function was going to log out what state
it's in and make the state changes, so let's start
by logging out what state it's in. print, what are you going to print?
Have a think. If we're going to log the state to the
Console, what would you print? myState! Do you want to
try it? Hopefully, it'll just print
"cell", it's going to be pretty boring but let's just do it. Play,
prison, Console, cell.
Cel cell cell cell cell, every frame. I have collapse on,
in my Console. If you're seeing it this way, it's because you don't have
Collapse on. Either way, whatever tickles your fancy.
Fantastic! So, on Start we set the state to cell,
the Update method just prints the state, the state_cell method
never gets called, so let's change that. Let's make the state_cell
get called. So, what we're saying is
if (myState ==,
it's a comparison, two equals for a comparison.
== States.cell)
Then, what are we going to do?
Well, if we find ourselves in the cell state, we just call
state_cell, the method, and let it
deal with what happens. And we jump down here and it sets the
text and listens for the key S. What would happen if the
Key S got pushed? Well, then the state would change
right. myState = States
with a capital S
.what? Well, we've just pushed...
Let's take a look at the GDD. We just pushed S, it takes us to sheets_0.
.sheets_0 perfect!
So, can you see what's happening here?
At the Start, just once, we set it to the cell state.
The Update function, every single frame., asks the question what state am I in?
If we're in the cell state, it goes to cell, else
if... Now, you can just copy.
(myState == States
dot what? sheets_0)
Well then, what are we going to do? Firstly, we're going to keep track of our brackets.
That's why this indentation is so important. And we're going to call a new
method that doesn't exist yet, called state_
sheets_0();
And that method is going to handle
what happens in the state sheets_0 state.
So, let's make that method, copy you're state_cell () method.
There it is! Different
text of course. So, in sheet_0 what's the deal?
I've pre-prepared a little bit of text, and I really encourage you
to use a completely different story in your game, but
what I'm going to say is: "You can't believe you sleep in these things, surely
it's"... Ooh, hang on! I'm having
strangenesses. Hold on one second. Let's try again!
Whoah, having very strangenesses!
OK, give me just a second, while Mono decides to
settle down. [Laughs] OK, it started displaying
properly now. OK, so we're back to saying:
"You can't believe you sleep in these things. Surely it's time somebody changed them. The pleasures of
prison life I guess". "Press R to Return
to roaming your cell." which was the only
transition we allowed, so it's (KeyCode.R). And what would the state be?
Well, check the State Diagram if you need to. Cell!
So, we go to State.cell; OK, I think
we have our first complete loop now!
state_sheets_0()! OK,
we need to have the method name called right.
OK, so if all is well, this thing should,
when you save, all be the right sensible colors.
And you're handling the
cell state, the sheets_0 state, and you've got different text
for those two, and different keyboard responses. So, we
should at least here be able to go to the sheets and back to the cell. Let's
see if it works! Play,
watch the Console, we're in the cell. Push S for Sheets.
We go to sheets_0, the text changes and
hopefully it's listening for R. We push R and we go back to the cell.
Perfect! You can see that this is basically the
fundamentals of the whole game! We can now transition state and
change the text. That's huge congratulations! That is
really really cool getting that far, because you actually,
if you're ambitious, could stop watching this video right now,
and just using this structure and filling out more
and more state methods and more and more if
statements in here, you could write a pretty complicated
adventure game. You could imagine the State Diagram continuing off to the
right. Just be careful, if you do decide to go off on your own
right now, that you have quite a few of these kind of single
choking points like mirror to cell mirror,
so that your diagram doesn't explode, otherwise you
can end up with so many states and so many interactions between them
that you just go insane very very quickly.
But if you want to see me finish this game, literally,
go ahead and watch the end of this video. I am simply going to
start fleshing out these methods,
copying and pasting some of the story code, because I don't
want you to sit and watch me type the story code. So,
here we go! Let me go through it! As I said, if you know
what is going on, just stop watching the video now. I'm really not going to do anything
that anybody's going to consider exciting here.
OK cool! So, let's go ahead
and get on with what the next
state in here is going to get. I'm just going to copy and paste actually.
else if
and sheets_0.
Where do I want to go to next? Let's look and see if we can go into the lock_0
state, for example.
lock_0) OK. And then, I'm going to need
to call a method that doesn't exist yet, being very careful with my brackets.
It's state_lock_0
method brackets
closed, semicolon. Sort your spelling
out. OK, the only thing is that
state_lock0(); doesn't exist yet, it's not surprising
So, I'm going to copy what we had,
on the sheets. Actually, I'm just going to bring my
lock_0 solution straight in.
Save you watching me type too much
stuff. Here you go! lock_0, it has some new text,
which you're welcome to read at your leisure, when you test the game.
By the way, if you don't want to go through and do all of this, on the next lecture,
we're going to give you the code to download.
So, you can go ahead and download the TextController.cs, which has all of this
in it if you don't really fancy typing it all out. That's one option, if you
want to reproduce our game. Another option is you just
carry on yourself now, and make an awesome story, and then,
rejoin me on the video where I show you how to
make this buildable for the web and share it with your friends.
Alright, but if you were to look at the lock, you could return to the
cell, so that's a lock_1. And then, I
basically just got a whole bunch of others, which I'm going to
just start putting in. So, lock_0 would be another one.
For example, we have lock_1. What's lock_1? Lock_1 is
when we look at the lock and have the mirror in hand.
So, that would be what happened at lock_1, and it give you
the option to get to freedom. What else have we got?
We've got sheets_1, which I think
we haven't dealt with yet. I want to stick that straight under sheets,
and that says something slightly different. I'm
using some subtlety and saying different things at each
stage, because I think that's really cool!
The other thing that I'm doing is I'm
slightly changing the syntax,
in places, while I'm just bringing up the...
Whereas we had the curly brackets, like this,
and then, open
curly brackets, indent, myState =
closed curly brackets. It takes up a lot of lines doing that! So, one optoin
for you is to just do it the way that
I've done here. It's just a white space change,
so that they all line up. So, you see what I'm saying. You go
from myState, indented there, you just delete it back, and then,
tab in here, so that you end up
with a slightly more readable list.
So, you might well want to do that, and you can do the same
with your inputs, exactly the same refactoring.
you're just going from that
back to that, basically. It's a very
minor, very minor, thing. So, we have...
What do we have, sheets_0, sheets_1? Now, one of the easiest
ways to keep track of what's going on here is
to continue to fill out your Update function.
In fact, fill., out your Update function first, because what's going to
happen is the methods are going to go red, when they don't exist,
and that'll tell you what methods you need to write. So,
I'm going to refactor the Update function in the same way. I'm going to delete back,
like so,
so that I have single lines for each if statement.
Just deleting back.
Remember the white space doesn't matter between
our instructions.
OK, so it's going to be that format, and what I'm going to do is tab in
about this far, for the
code blocks. So, that's
so that they just line up and they're really easy to see.
Alright, so you can imagine with very little imagination. I want you
to do that for the rest of the
states, and if you do that you'll get this: sheet_0,
sheets_1, yada yada yada. And this is what
I mean about it going red. You can see that the three functions we still need to defin
are mirror, so let's do that now.
And the moment
I put a mirror function in, again you're going to put your
story in, aren't you? You're going to be nice and creative for us.
Yeah, I've got a mirror function in and I've got my if statements in this new
format. Then, that's no longer red
but cell_mirror is. The difference being you're back in your cell
holding onto the mirror, and it's a slightly different situation. I
encourage you to use a different story text, on every single
screen, because I think it add much more richness
to the game. So
for example, you're still in your cell and you still want to escape,
etc. In my opinion, that's
nice, that just adds some richness. And then, the final
one you're going to need is a freedom state, which is
going to look something like... Let's put it at the bottom, it just makes
sense. The order of these, of course, doesn't matter, but
it is nice to have some sort of logical order
to them. So, with the wind
that's it! Let's test it, that's what I want you to do next, is just
test your game. So,
run! "You are in a prison
cell, and you want to escape." So, let's look at the Sheets, so we go to sheets_0.
We can return to the cell. Good! We could
look at the lock, L for Lock. Now, Lock is
not working, so this is a typical kind of loop you're going to
need to go through. Why is the lock not working?
So, from cell I don't have the necessary
if statement for the lock
alright. Actually, there's three things I can
do in the cell, so let me just put that code in here. Bang!
S, M, and L, going to Sheets, Mirror, and Lock
respectively OK.
So, let's take a look! Sheets takes us
to Sheets, Return. Lock takes us to Lock
and Return. Mirror takes us to Mirror and Return.
Fantastic! If we go to the Mirror and take the mirror, then
we still want to escape. We could look at our sheets and they don't look any better,
for having a mirror. We could look at the lock,
and it's giving us a hint that we may be able to open it.
We may want to return to the cell, it'd be a slightly strange thing to do,
or we could go to the lock and then open the door.
And then, what I've added in, at the bottom here,
is a P to Play again.
So, if you push P then,
Play again goes straight back to the cell.
P Plays again and we're back at the beginning! Fantastic,
you have a complete loop, you have a working game! Let's
just recap what we've actually done here!
So, we looked at the structure of our engine. We worked out what an
enum was, and then, you completed the story. So
congratulations! See you soon!